This is clearly a field you're desperately
concerned about.
Yeah, good old jock. We've got a problem with him.
I'm
not sure that the ocean is really dying per se, but
I've been up and down the east coast of the United
States quite a bit, and within five, ten miles of
the coast, I think that Since I've been out there,
which is the last 10 or 15 years, we see a lot more
garbage floating around, plastics in
particular, things that never disappear. But I
think as far as pollution effects go,
I think we're selling the biota kind of short. I
think they have a tremendous genetic variability
within the population to survive
a lot of these insults that we give them.
What we end up doing is, in the worst aspect, well,
in the worst aspect you just kill everything, but
that usually doesn't happen in a very large area.
It might be a localized effect. On the periphery of
that, then we have a very strong natural selection
force. We end up picking and choosing, well we
don't, but the pollutant which I think once you get
it down in concentration a little ways acts as any
other environmental stress and what you end up
doing is eliminating some species maybe, but we
sure as heck select among the rest of the species so
that we end up not really drastically changing the
population. Once you get some undefined distance
from the point source of your pollution, the
experimental work going on up in Canada, there's a
CPEX program that's controlled pollution
environmental experiment or something like
that. I forget what the acronym stands for. And
their feeling has been that whenever they perturb
the system with a pollutant, what we end up doing is
speeding up the natural succession process that
we see in the ocean every year, where we have an
environmental stress when you get into high
latitudes, you know, when winter comes, knocks
things off, and then when it warms up again next
year, then things come back again. And I think the
scientists involved up there have gotten to the
point where they think of pollution input as just
another environmental stress. And so that the
natural population, the ambient population,
because they do have in each individual species
some reasonable range in the genetic
capabilities of it, I don't think we're going to
see pollution just killing everything right off.
You might end up, again, in localized areas with
some rather peculiar effects. The work we were
doing down in Long Island was a case in point. And
what had happened down there was there are two
major areas in the United States where they raise
ducks for commercial purposes. And the ducks are
so darn efficient, all they do is excrete uric acid
and sand. That's about the only thing that comes
out the back end of them. You put grain in the front,
and that's what comes out the back. And there's
such heavy concentrations on these little
estuaries that it's just like dumping trainloads
of fertilizer in there every day. did in the bay
itself was so alter the nutrient chemistry that
what they ended up doing was selecting for a
certain kind of an organism. It turned out to be a
little green algae that swam around instead of the
normal diatoms. Well, what it did was it wiped out
the blue point oyster.
Again, you know, this is, I guess it depends on what
size you want to look at the ocean. If you're
looking at the ocean as a whole, you can sort of
shake your head and say, well, what difference
does it make? If you happen to be a blue point oyster
connoisseur, well, that's death. And so it
depends on what your point of view is on the sort of
thing. In Great South Bay, what they ended up
doing, it turned out to be a very confusing
problem. The boaters wanted to maintain a couple
channels that would be open so they could get their
boats in and out, but that's not historically the
way the place has been. A hurricane came along at
one point and broke the barrier island, increased
the flushing rate of the bay, and sure enough, the
oysters started growing again. Well, the Corps of
Engineers said, this can't be, so they filled the
inlet in, and of course what happened was that the
area was taken over by this little green algae
again.
As far as major pollution effects in the ocean, I
think what a lot of the people are talking about are
such low numbers. I mean, they have to go out and
document it. They have to measure it some way. And
more often than not, our own analytical
capabilities aren't enough to snuff. And so we're
just guessing. We don't know whether we can
demonstrate a pollution effect in most of the
ocean.
Again, if you look at where they've been dumping
the sludge off New York, sure as heck you can find
that effect there. But again, it's a matter of
scale. My own preference is I would much rather
have them dump it out there than in my backyard. And
as long as we are involved with,
say, sewage system, garbage collection systems,
and things like this, Probably the ocean's a
reasonably good place to put it, mainly because I
can't think of a better place. I'd just as soon not
have it, but we've got it. Another case in point in
our department is that I hate like heck to see him go
out from the galley three times a day and hurl that
stuff over the side of the boat.
This is a very minor thing. Even if you take all the
ships in the world and things like this, we're
still talking about a minor input of plastics,
aluminum, floating bottles, and things like
this. So we thought, wouldn't it be neat if we got a
compactor on the ship and would take out the
non-biodegradable materials and would haul them
back home again? And it turns out that the only
place we can get rid of this is in Seattle. If we come
into Los Angeles with it, they won't let us offload
it. mainly because the Port of Los Angeles can't
handle it. They've got their own garbage problems
out there. And so I think most people
idealistically wouldn't want to put anything
into the ocean. The same thing, they don't want to
put it in their backyard. They want to put it in
somebody else's backyard, perhaps. But the real
problem is that we've got a system set up to collect
garbage, collect sewage. And we just can't put a
cork in them. We just can't stop them. And I think,
again, dumping them in the ocean is probably one of
the better places to put it right now. I mean,
because we don't have any other place to put it. If
you didn't generate the material, of course, then
you're a fat city. We're having the same problem
out where I live. We're in a rural area, and they put
little school, an elementary school up the road
from us. According to state law, it has to be
serviced by a sewer. And nobody else has sewers out
there. And I'm just opposed to sewers in general,
because that's, from sort of a moralistic point of
view, I view that as going and throwing my garbage
over the fence into my neighbor's yard. And at
least we're in an area now out there where if they
control the housing density, they don't have to go
to sewers. Because if they run a sewer in, what's
going to happen is they're going to trip the area
into a concentrated building, because then
they'll be permitted to build five houses per
acre, the present time of one house per acre. But my
argument would be, don't run a sewer in there,
because then you don't create the population
demand that needs a sewer. I'm not sure which is the
chicken and which is the egg, but if we can keep, if
you can generate a system so that you don't
generate the problem, then you don't have to solve
it. So I'm not sure. Again, getting back to the
pollution effects or pollution of the ocean as a
whole,
I think it would be extremely difficult to stop
dumping this kind of material. mainly because we
just don't have any other place to put it. And it's a
historical fact. I mean, New York City is serviced
by sewers. And part of the product of the sewer is
sludge. And I forget what the numbers involved
are, but the magnitude of this thing, it just sort
of boggles your mind.
You know, we make jokes. Sure, we'll send it to
Louisiana or someplace, you know, Oklahoma,
Arizona, you know, as long as it's far enough away
from my backyard. But it's sort of a situation
where you can't... I don't think you can have an
ideal solution. I think you have to make a
compromise. It's trade-offs. And hopefully this
is where... we can get away from some of this
emotionalism that's been associated with the
pollution problem so that hopefully the
scientific community can give somebody some
alternatives. They might all be bad, but at least
you're not stuck with just throwing up your hands
and saying nothing can be done. I think, again, if
you trace back the environmental movement,
It seemed to me that most of the people involved
were either extremely clever or rather
dimwitted, and that they just said, stop it, but
never seemed to pay much attention to the fact that
you probably couldn't really stop the problem.
The good that has come out of it has probably been
that it's made people in government or in the areas
where they make these kinds of decisions to
perhaps think about it a little bit. Because there
are, I mean, I am hopeful that there are some
alternatives. I mean, we don't have to keep going
the old way over and over again. We'd like to think
that you learn something from history, although
sometimes you wonder.
Again, I don't think the ocean is dying, per se. I
think it's, again, it's a matter of scale. If we
talk about the ocean as a whole, I don't think it's
dying. If you look at some localized areas, which a
localized area might be 100 square kilometers,
yeah, we sure as heck have made some sort of impact.
But if we look at some of the larger natural
phenomena, I'm thinking of things like the El Nino
of South America, which is an environmental
catastrophe that happens every ten years. It's
not so bad now, but apparently in historical
times, thousands and thousands of people would
die because either they'd get flooded out or
they'd starve to death. I mean, granted, the birds
all died. We're talking about tens of millions and
20 million birds die in a year because they started
that.
Again, the ocean has a fair amount of resiliency.
It can bounce back from these insults. The other
thing that I sort of tried to talk up was that The
oceans themselves are changing over time. These
are natural fluctuations that have to do with
whether the North Pole goes to north-south or
whether it's in some other orientation, a
magnetic North Pole. We've had large-scale
climatic changes that have tremendous impacts,
and some of these things have been Well, I guess the
easiest one to demonstrate is a lot of species that
were around a million years ago aren't here
anymore. And they've been exterminated. And
whether it was a biological extermination or a
climatic extermination, we don't really know.
But just in historical times, we can demonstrate,
at least in the fish catch literature from the
oceans, that there have been major perturbations
in the oceans over the last five, six hundred
years. The fall of the Hanseatic League on the
Baltic is probably a climatic thing. The herring
that they made their living on disappeared, and
it's probably a result of climatic changes. The
literature in Japan on the movement of the herring
fishery around the islands for the last five, six
hundred years show major fluctuations in the
hydrographic characteristics in that region. So
I guess sort of what you boil this thing down to is,
what's the natural condition of the ocean? Is it
the one we see now, or the one we want, or the one
we're going to get because of natural processes?
And I think there have been some clear examples of
man's impact, i.e., the brown pelican and the DDT
story.
But if you look at the small zooplankton or the
zooplankton in the North Sea, which has been
changing over the last 25 years, it's been
documented.
Who knows what's the cause of that? The
unfortunate thing is that there's not enough
environmental data to go with this thing. We don't
know what the sea surface temperature is and
things like this for the same period of time, but
we've had a significant change in this species
composition and probably total biomass of the
small animals that the fish feed on, and of course
we catch the fish. The irony of the thing is that I
think they're catching more fish now than they
have 25 years ago, but we're not quite sure what
sort of effect, you know, cause and effect on that
sort of thing. As a matter of fact, I wrote a paper
with some other people at an airport once. We were
over in Plymouth, England doing a workshop for
UNESCO, or SCORE, I forget which one it was. about
how do you monitor life in the ocean, how do you
detect changes. And so we were sitting down there
and we're all reeling off these little cases we
know of, of catastrophes happening in the ocean
where all fish populations would disappear and
things like this. And like I said, we were sitting
there in Heathrow and there was a Swede and a German
and there was a Japanese guy and a couple guys from
Canada and some from here. So we're all waiting for
planes. And in a period of half an hour, we decided,
well, we'll write this thing up, and we'll send it
into a journal, sort of demonstrating that
there's probably no steady state equilibrium
condition in the ocean, and that probably some of
the things that people were attributing to man's
influence was probably just sliding over the top
of this natural variation that has happened ever
since we've had records. So
there's a certain amount of truth to the old
engineering adage that the solution to pollution
is dilution. And again, taking sort of a practical
point of view, is that we're probably stuck with
this for quite some time.
We're not always happy with it, but I think if you
take somewhat a realistic point of view of what's
happening in the country and the world, we
might be able to do it better. But at the present
time, I don't see us being able, in a realistic sort
of a sense, being able to devote the resources that
are required to pull off these kinds of problems.
Again, another one which just bugs the living heck
out of me is the gasoline stuff, the oil.
To try to knock off the emissions, to try to knock
off the lead, what we've done is we've made cars
heavier and heavier and heavier. So we end up using
more gas per mile to go from point A to point B. If you
look at the Japanese cars and some of the European
cars, per mile travel, they put out a lot less
emissions than we do. I think one of the reasons is
they've been paying a buck and a half a gallon for
gas for a long time. Maybe that's the kind of a spur
you need to get at that sort of thing, rather than
these catalytic converters and all this emission
control stuff we have on our cars, which keeps
making them heavier and heavier and heavier. we
end up putting out more fumes per mile driven than
if we put the economic burr on them to make them
lighter and to try to get better mileage. It's sort
of a game you play.
It's like almost any other problem that you face in
a laboratory. You might have to trade off one thing
to get another. And in view of the fact that there
must be, I don't know how much oil there is in the
whole world, but there must be some finite limit to
it. Maybe it behooves us to try to stretch it out as
long as possible. And I think the environmental,
in retrospect, I think this environmental
concern is going to be viewed as a pretty heavy cost
that we've paid to try to control emissions by
going the route that we have done, rather than
going the other way of given it the emphasis to go to
lighter vehicles. So
again, it goes back to how do you make decisions on
this sort of a thing?
The environmental issue is sure a hot, emotional
issue there. And I think if the government doesn't
screw it up,
I think they've put the blanket on it, and you don't
hear so much about it now. A lot of these things have
been enacted into legislation, and hopefully
they don't just bury it in bureaucracy and
government inertia. But again, I think the
scientific community can come up with some
reasonable alternatives. What if? If you do this,
what happens? If you do that, what happens?
that kind of a game was played on a lot of
environmental issues, but hopefully they will in
the future. Is that the direction your work is
taking you now? No, actually, I'm playing fun and
games. No, not quite. If
you go back and look at what I've done
professionally, I've sort of go back and forth and
I get sort of problem oriented, sort of mission
oriented, and then I get back into sort of the real
academic kinds of things. The major problem I'm
working on right now is transport of materials
from the surface down through the water column and
eventually onto the sea floor. I got started into
this thing primarily by the question, how do
animals on the bottom of the ocean make a living?
From any practical point of view, that's probably
kind of a ridiculous
problem to be working on. It turns out it's one of
the big unknowns in biological oceanography. But
on the total overall working ecosystem, it
probably doesn't make any difference. But it
turned out to be a problem that was rather
interesting. was largely unworked. So it gives
you the satisfaction of working in an area that you
can come up with new ideas, new answers at least, or
at least data to where none existed before. So from
that point of view, it's very satisfying. On the
outside of our effort, we've got a bunch of
chemists playing around. We provide them with
samples and materials. And these people are
involved with hydrocarbon pollution and trace
metal pollution and stuff like this. So we're sort
of providing a service to some of the people who
are, I guess you would call them environmentally
oriented. I've gotten into the deep ocean mining
problem.
Again, basically the tool that we use are some
sediment traps. which we played around with.
We've designed them and developed them here. And
they're probably as good as anybody else's. And
we've been in the game for about two years. But the
thing that got us into the deep ocean mining
problem was that you suck up all these nodules and
the slurry and everything else, bring it up, sieve
out the nodules, and you dump this other stuff back
over the side. What's the environmental impact?
Well, at least in that case, you can actually
define some realistic scientific questions that
you can actually go out and take some measurements
and answer, which isn't usually the way it works.
So in this place, in this particular project,
we're providing, again, basically a support
service.
We have defined a bunch of actual questions that
are ecologically important, and they're also
phrased scientifically, so you can go out and take
a couple measurements, not a couple, but you can go
out and actually measure it, rather than sitting
over a couple cans of beer and, you know, there's a
lot of rhetoric about it. I was involved with the
SST thing with the ozone layer, and again, that we
were able to
structure the questions in such a way that they
were, again, of importance to the environmental
question, the ecological type thing, are we
killing everything, and this sort of thing. But
again, we could frame them into a scientific
context so that you could actually do some
experiments and measurements, get some data, and
actually test them. Again, this is sort of
combining the best of both sides. I mean, here you
have an interesting, again, it's an interesting
little scientific problem. It's got a start,
middle, and a finish, you know, when you're done
with it. It also was
of interest to the environmental people.
But I don't see that that kind of a program comes
very easy. Either you're lucky and you can fall
into it, or it's the right people at the right time
at the right place. But to try to manage something
like that I think would be extremely difficult. I
really don't know how you make these things work.
I've been involved with a number of these kinds of
efforts in the past, and when I look back at them,
trying to figure out why they worked or why they
didn't work. There are no principles. There's no
such management. You just can't come up with any
management principles on this sort of a thing. But
yeah, I've been involved with, like I said,
sometimes kind of academic, sometimes
mission-oriented things. And I'm not sure why I
flopped from one to the other. Well, okay, when I
was with the ultraviolet light work, after we did
our thing and we sort of came to some conclusions,
we had a fair amount of pressure on us to change our
mind. And so I think I sort of shied away from that
and then I got into my more academic approach now
that I've been doing for the last couple of years.
The SST ozone stuff I did in 73 and 74 and since then
I've been more or less looking at gross food chain
dynamics in the ocean again. The deep ocean mining
thing is something that's kind of a small project
that probably a one-shot deal as far as I'm
concerned. My involvement will probably be a
one-shot deal this October, and that'll be the end
of it. But again, it was, it's the kind of, it got
defined in such a way that I think even the most
academic type people probably wouldn't object to
being involved in it. But it's, again, it was the
right time, right place, right people type of a
situation. But again, drawing more and more
people into the so-called environmentally
directed, oriented kind of problems, I guess the
biggest thing that always happens is that they
find out they can't answer any questions. They
either phrase the question at such a level that no
mortal can answer them. Or if they finally get down
to the nitty gritty, they find out there's no
database. And so that you end up trying to solve
these things using all sorts of other inputs. And
maybe social economic things are the things that
sort of solve these questions anyway. When
Congress gets around to it, I think we're talking
about votes and things like that. And maybe that's
the area where they should be solved. But I think
the scientists should be able to hopefully give
them some alternatives. Of course, being here in
Seattle and now that the Alaskan pipeline has
finally gotten started, we're still writhing
over, what are we going to do with the oil once we get
it into the boats out there? Los Angeles says they
don't want it. People around here say we don't want
it.
Maybe what they've got to do is build a port
somewhere out here, and rather than saying, oh,
we've got to be careful, we're not going to have any
oil spills, maybe what they ought to say is, look,
we're going to have an oil spill, what are we going
to do about it? Rather than trying to prevent the
oil spill, maybe they ought to make the
assumption, because the probability of an oil
spill is one, it's going to happen, and say, okay,
Let's dump some money into it and let's forget
about the environmental impact study of worrying
about all the little wigglies and crawlies in the
bottom. They're going to die when the oil gets
there. Let's do some engineering studies on it and
figure out how we can keep it there rather than
letting it slip out of the port and come sloshing
down straight to the one that fugues into Puget
Sound.